feat(docs): add docs to cover task primitive in code interpreter and subagent orchestrations (#4416)
langchain-ai/docs: src/oss/deepagents/interpreters.mdx

Reviewer: should we bump to 0.2.0?

```suggestion
    Interpreters require `langchain-quickjs>=0.2.0`.
```

we don't support below 3.11

Reviewer 2: if it works in 0.1.0 then no. Does it?

Reviewer: would we consider adding a callout to dcode to this page linking to instructions on how to use / test it out there?

Reviewer 2: I think that's a good idea, I think the docs for how to use interpreters in dcode should live near dcode but we can add a sentence after the version callouts to say "If you'rel ooking to use interpreters with `dcode`, see... "

## When to use an interpreter

> Most agent work alternates between model reasoning and single tool calls. That breaks down when the agent needs to compose many steps, reason over structured data, or hold intermediate state. An interpreter gives it a runtime to do that work in code: run control flow, call allowlisted tools, store variables, and return only a compact result to the model.

Reviewer: my naive rebuttal from a user POV: _what about parallel tool calls?_

should we call out by name why they're not much better?

Reviewer 2: so should we keep tool execution as a better way of putting that?

Author: I think we should call out that tool calling doesn't work at scale and isn't reliable. For example, we've seen instances where when trying to analyze 500 traces the agent will choose to only analyze 75. It doesn't reliably do all 500.

Author: updated to call this out.

By default, interpreter state also persists across turns in the same thread by snapshotting the working state after each agent run, and restoring it before the next run.
:::

## What interpreter code can reach

By default, interpreter code runs against QuickJS with no access to the host filesystem, network, shell, package manager, or clock. It can compute, hold state, and write to `console.log`, and nothing more.

Two explicit bridges extend that reach:

- **Tools**, through [programmatic tool calling](#programmatic-tool-calling). Expose an allowlist of tools as async functions under the `tools` namespace. These can be the agent's own tools or standalone tools you define and pass in.
- **Subagents**, through the built-in [`task()` global](#orchestrate-subagents-from-code). Dispatch configured subagents from code and orchestrate them in plain JavaScript.

> Programmatic tool calling is off until you pass an allowlist. Subagent dispatch is on by default whenever the agent has subagents, and you can turn it off. Nothing else crosses the QuickJS boundary unless you expose it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Programmatic tool calling is off until you [enable it](#enable-ptc). Subagent dispatch is on by default whenever the agent has subagents, and you can turn it off. Nothing else crosses the QuickJS boundary unless you expose it.
```

## Programmatic tool calling

Programmatic tool calling (PTC) exposes selected agent tools inside the interpreter under the global `tools` namespace. Instead of asking the model to issue one tool call, wait for the result, and then decide the next call, the agent can write code that calls tools in loops, branches, retries, or parallel batches.

> This helps when intermediate results are only inputs to the next step: the interpreter filters or aggregates them before anything returns to the model, keeping multi-step workflows token efficient. It is model-agnostic, implemented by middleware rather than a provider-specific tool-calling API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This helps when intermediate results are only inputs to the next step: the interpreter filters or aggregates them before anything returns to the model, keeping multi-step workflows token-efficient. It is model-agnostic, implemented by middleware rather than a provider-specific tool-calling API.
```

const agent = createDeepAgent({

>   model: "openai:gpt-5.4",

Reviewer: nit

```suggestion
  model: "openai:gpt-5.5",
```

Author: updated.

  middleware: [createCodeInterpreterMiddleware({ ptc: ["web_search"] })],
});
```
:::

After PTC is enabled, the agent can call the allowlisted tool from interpreter code. This example searches several topics in parallel and combines the results before returning to the model:

```javascript
const topics = ["retrieval", "memory", "evaluation"];

const results = await Promise.all(
  topics.map((topic) =>
    tools.webSearch({ query: `${topic} best practices 2025` }),
  ),
);

results.join("\n\n");
```

<Warning>
    PTC calls currently execute through the interpreter bridge and do not go through the normal tool calling path. As a result, `interrupt_on` approval workflows are not enforced per PTC-invoked tool call.

> </Warning>

Reviewer 3: this is `interruptOn` in JS, maybe we want to put it behind a fence

Author: good call

```javascript
const topics = ["retrieval", "memory", "evaluation"];

const results = await Promise.all(
  topics.map((topic) =>
    tools.webSearch({ query: `${topic} best practices 2025` }),
  ),
);

results.join("\n\n");
```

:::python
<Warning>
    PTC calls currently execute through the interpreter bridge and do not go through the normal tool calling path. As a result, `interrupt_on` approval workflows are not enforced per PTC-invoked tool call.
</Warning>
:::
:::js
<Warning>
    PTC calls currently execute through the interpreter bridge and do not go through the normal tool calling path. As a result, `interruptOn` approval workflows are not enforced per PTC-invoked tool call.
</Warning>
:::

## Orchestrate subagents from code

When an agent has [subagents](/oss/deepagents/subagents) and interpreter middleware, the interpreter exposes a built-in `task()` global that dispatches subagents from code. A task spanning many independent units (reviewing every file in a directory, triaging a batch of tickets) becomes a loop that fans the work out, so it runs deterministically instead of one model-chosen tool call at a time.

### The `task()` global

> `task()` takes the prompt the subagent receives (`description`), which configured subagent to run (`subagentType`), and an optional `responseSchema` for structured output. It runs a full agentic loop and resolves to the subagent's result:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`task()` takes the following inputs:

 - `description`: the prompt for the subagent
 - `subagentType`: which configured subagent to run
 - `responseSchema` (optional): structured output
 
a `task()` runs a full agentic loop and resolves to the subagent's result:
```

> ```javascript

Reviewer 2: I think this needs js gates

const critical = review.issues.filter((issue) => issue.severity === "high");
```

When you pass `responseSchema`, the resolved value is already a typed JavaScript object; only call `JSON.parse` if a subagent intentionally returned a JSON string.

### Steering orchestration

The interpreter middleware ships orchestration guidance in the system prompt, so the agent already knows how to fan out in bounded batches, filter between passes, and synthesize results. You don't hand-write that logic or prompt for it turn by turn.

To shape *what* the agent orchestrates, work through the inputs it already responds to:

- **The subagents you configure.** Their `name` and `description` define the roles available. A `reviewer` paired with a `verifier` invites a two-pass check; a single `analyzer` invites a straight fan-out.
- **The task message.** Phrasing like "I only want confirmed issues, not maybes" or "be exhaustive" nudges the agent toward verification or an open-ended sweep.
- **The system prompt.** Use `systemPrompt` (or the agent's instructions) to add standing guidance when you want a consistent strategy across runs.

### Working with large inputs

> The same `task()` mechanism handles inputs too large to reason over in one pass, the approach described in the [Recursive Language Models paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.24601). Keep the large input or working set in interpreter variables (the *variable space*, distinct from the model's context), then let the model inspect it, split it into slices, dispatch a subagent per slice, and stitch the returned results back together.

Reviewer 2: note sure why `same`
```suggestion
The `task()` mechanism handles inputs too large to reason over in one pass, the approach described in the [Recursive Language Models paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.24601). Keep the large input or working set in interpreter variables (the *variable space*, distinct from the model's context), then let the model inspect it, split it into slices, dispatch a subagent per slice, and stitch the returned results back together.
```

    class Answer output
```

> The recursive call is just `task()` over slices. The interpreter calls a subagent for each one, combines their answers, and returns a single synthesized result:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The recursive call runs `task()` over slices of the input. The interpreter calls a subagent for each one, combines their answers, and returns a single synthesized result:
```

    model="openai:gpt-5.4",
    subagents=[
        {
            "name": "bug-fixer",
            "description": "Investigates bug reports and provides reproduction steps",
            "system_prompt": "You are a bug triage specialist. Investigate each bug report and provide clear reproduction steps.",
        },
        {
            "name": "feature-analyst",
            "description": "Evaluates feature requests for feasibility and effort",
            "system_prompt": "You are a product analyst. Evaluate each feature request for technical feasibility, estimated effort, and potential impact.",
        },
        {
            "name": "support-agent",
            "description": "Answers user questions based on documentation",
            "system_prompt": "You are a support specialist. Answer user questions clearly based on the available documentation.",
        },
    ],
    middleware=[CodeInterpreterMiddleware()],
)

result = await agent.ainvoke({
    "messages": [{"role": "user", "content": "Go through these 30 support tickets. Categorize each one, then for bugs give me reproduction steps, and for feature requests give me a feasibility assessment."}]
})
```
:::

> 

Reviewer 3: should add some small code snippets here

Author: ya let's update with some lean code snippets of what the agent writes - we can do something like "What you configure" and "What the agent writes"

releaseSummary;
```

> ### Orchestration patterns

Reviewer 2: this is great though I wonder if it should be its own page - but merge this as is and we can consider that separately.

The agent picks a strategy from the shape of the task; these emerge from how it writes interpreter code, not from configuration, and the subagents you make available determine what it can do. Every pattern shares one model: hold work in JS variables, dispatch subagents with `task()`, and combine results in code. The diagrams below show the common shapes, each with a runnable example.

#### Classify and act

> Items are classified first, then each is handled by a specialized subagent based on its classification. This lets you process mixed inputs where different items need different expertise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Items are classified first, then each item is handled by a specialized subagent based on its classification. This lets you process mixed inputs where different items need different expertise.
```
